
BLOOD PRESSURE
California Department of Health Care Services, Systems of Care Division
Child Health and Disability Prevention Program, Health Assessment Guidelines
July 2016 Page 1
RATIONALE
Hypertension in children is defined as blood pressure (BP) at or above the 95th
percentile based on sex, age, and height. If hypertension is not recognized and treated
blood pressure may continue to rise and cause irreversible end organ damage, which
may become life-threatening. In a 2005 report, a large national database indicated the
prevalence of high BP in children and adolescents is increasing.
1 Hypertension in the
majority of children less than 10 years of age is usually due to an identifiable cause, so
it should be closely investigated. In contrast, the majority of hypertensive adolescents
have essential hypertension without an identifiable cause. It is important to use height
and weight in assessing blood pressure in children and adolescents . Early identification
and treatment of hypertension may result in improved long-term outcomes and reduced
morbidity.
The state of California Child Health and Disability Prevention (CHDP) program is
implementing CHDP periodicity schedules to conform with the American Academy of
Pediatrics Bright Futures Recommendations for Periodic Preventive Health Care and
will provide updated CHDP blood pressure screening guidelines as information
becomes available.
SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
• Measure blood pressure at each health assessment visit starting at three years
of age.
• For children with a history of prematurity or conditions listed below, measurement
of blood pressure should start with every well child check.
• Utilize the appropriate cuff size for the child’s arm. Blood pressure by
auscultation is the Gold Standard.
• Document the patient’s position, the limb, and the cuff size with each
measurement if hypertension is suspected.
• Compare blood pressure measurement with standard percentiles. Diagnosis,
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents,
Blood Pressure Tables, pages 8-15.
Bright Futures*
Performing Preventive Service: A Bright Futures Handbook. Blood Pressure, pages 57-
64.
Conditions Under Which Children less than three years of age should have BP
measured:
2
• History of prematurity; very low birth weight; or other neonatal complication
requiring intensive care
Hypertension in children is defined as blood pressure (BP) at or above the 95th percentile based on sex,
age, and height. If hypertension is not recognized and treated blood pressure may continue to rise and
cause irreversible end organ damage, which may become life-threatening. In a 2005 report, a large national
database indicated the prevalence of high BP in children and adolescents is increasing.1 Hypertension in
the majority of children less than 10 years of age is usually due to an identifiable cause, so it should be
closely investigated. In contrast, the majority of hypertensive adolescents have essential hypertension
without an identifiable cause. It is important to use height and weight in assessing blood pressure in children
and adolescents . Early identification and treatment of hypertension may result in improved long-term
outcomes and reduced morbidity.
Diagnosis
Evalutation, and Treatment of High blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents
Blood Pressure Tables
Bright Futures*
Performing Preventive Service: A Bright Futures Handbook
Guideline # 7
BLOOD PRESSURE
California Department of Health Care Services, Systems of Care Division
Child Health and Disability Prevention Program, Health Assessment Guidelines
July 2016 Page 2
• Congenital heart disease (repaired or non-repaired)
• Recurrent urinary tract infections, hematuria, or proteinuria
• Known renal disease or urologic malformations
• Family history of congenital renal disease
• Solid organ transplant
• Malignancy or bone marrow transplant
• Treatment with drugs known to raise BP
• Other systemic disorders associated with hypertension (neurofibromatosis.
tuberous sclerosis, etc.)
• Evidence of elevated intracranial pressure
Basics of Blood Pressure Measurement
3
• Obtain measurements of blood pressure with the patient seated in quiet
surroundings. Fully expose the arm and rest the arm at the level of the heart.
• A well-fitting cuff will completely encircle the circumference of the arm and cover
approximately 75 percent of the upper arm with the inflatable bladder of the
compression cuff. Using too small a cuff results in falsely elevated
measurements, while using too large a cuff results may make it difficult to obtain
a measurement.
• Lightly place the bell of the stethoscope on the antecubital fossa over the
brachial artery. Applying too much pressure can lead to inaccurate
measurements. Rapidly inflate the cuff to about 20mm Hg above the normal
cutoff for age of the child, then deflate the cuff at a rate of about 2 to 3 mm Hg
per second. Use the onset of a tapping sound for determination of the systolic
blood pressure. The diastolic BP is the disappearance of sounds through the
bell.
• Compare the systolic and diastolic blood pressure measurements to the 90th and
95th percentiles according to sex and age found in Diagnosis, Evaluation, and
Treatment of High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents, Blood Pressure
Tables, pages 8-15. Consider the child’s height and weight in your interpretation.
BP Classification/Interpretation2
BP is defined by systolic BP (SBP) and diastolic BP (DBP) percentiles for age, sex, and
height.
• Normal BP: SBP and DBP < 90th. Recheck in one year.
• PreHypertension: SBP or DBP > 90th percentile to < 95 percentile or BP >120/80
mmHg to <95th percentile. Recheck in 6 months. Begin weight management (as
appropriate).
• Stage 1 Hypertension (HTN): SBP and/or DBP > 95th percentile to < 99th
percentile plus 5 mmHg. Recheck in 1 to 2 weeks. If BP remains at this level on
Basics of Blood Pressure Measurement
BP Classification/Interpretation
Guideline # 7
BLOOD PRESSURE
California Department of Health Care Services, Systems of Care Division
Child Health and Disability Prevention Program, Health Assessment Guidelines
July 2016 Page 3
recheck, begin evaluation and treatment including weight management if
appropriate.
• Stage 2 HTN: SBP and/or DBP > 99th percentile plus t mmHg. Begin evaluation
and treatment within 1 week, immediately if symptomatic.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR REFERRAL TREATMENT AND/OR FOLLOW-UP
See Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure in Children and
Adolescents, Blood Pressure Tables, Blood Pressure Tables, pages 8-15.2
• Counsel and monitor children who are asymptomatic and whose initial blood
pressure is in the high normal range for age.
• Recognize a single measurement of high blood pressure is not the basis for a
diagnosis of hypertension and may be due to the lability of blood pressure in
children.
• Further evaluate a child who sustains a systolic or diastolic reading at or above
the 95th percentile for their sex and age (measured on at least three separate
occasions and averaged together).
Resources
National Heart. Lung and Blood Institute. (Pediatric) High Blood Pressure.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. National Institute of Health. National
Heart, Lung, and Blood, NIH Publication 07-5268. A Pocket Guide to Blood Pressure
Measurement in Children (May 2007)
References
1 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. National Institute of Health.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood. The Fourth Report on the Diagnosis. Evaluation.
and Treatment of High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. NIH Publication
N. 05-5267. originally printed September 1996 (96-3790). Revised May 2005.
Retrieved April 30. 2015. 2 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. National Institute of Health.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood, NIH Publication 07-5268. A Pocket Guide to Blood
Pressure Measurement in Children (May 2007). Retrieved May 5, 2015.
3 Nationwide Children’s, Blood Pressure Measurement. Retrieved June 30, 2015.
*American Academy of Pediatrics materials linked to with permission for reference only.
Use of these materials beyond the scope of these guidelines must be reviewed and
approved by the American Academy of Pediatrics, available at marketing@aap.org.
Further evaluate a child who sustains a systolic or diastolic reading at or above the 95th percentile for their
sex and age (measured on at least three separate occasions and averaged together).